ENRIQUE CABALLERO: In the
United States, it is estimated
that there's
about 100 million people
with diabetes and prediabetes--
100 million people
in the country
affected by
a blood sugar problem.
KELLY CLOSE: The economic impact
of diabetes is devastating.
We spent almost $350 billion
on diabetes in the
United States last year.
NARRATOR: Diabetes--
a chronic disease
that's notoriously
difficult to control.
It can maim and even kill.
A generation ago,
less than three percent
of Americans had diabetes.
Today, it's almost ten percent.
It is now predicted
that half of the U.S. population
will have either diabetes
or pre-diabetes
by the year 2025.
Half!
NARRATOR:
Living with diabetes today
is a story of new discoveries
about our food environments
and choices.
As a seven-year-old coming
from a Third-World country
and getting free candy,
I was, like,
"Yo, I'm so down
for America right now.
Like, this is tight."
NARRATOR: It builds
on exciting new progress
in drugs and technologies
that have made the disease
more manageable.
This device
is around the corner,
and that's really
what we're trying to do,
is get much better therapy
to people
that requires much less
of their participation
and provides much better care.
NARRATOR: And it reveals
the terrible struggles
that so many with diabetes
still have,
day in and day out.
So, they was looking at me,
like,
"How are you even standing here
on your feet?
You're supposed to be
in a coma."
CLOSE: So when we think
about the impact to the system--
way too many
emergency-room visits,
way too many amputations--
why isn't there
a war on diabetes?
♪ ♪
(siren blaring)
WOMAN: She got her flu shot
already.
So, this guy, I was just told...
no, then he's fine, okay.
We're good.
Okay, let's put Goodall
in a room
and I'll have my nurse
practitioner start with him.
Thank you.
WOMAN: That's good.
DEAN SCHILLINGER:
I'm Dean Schillinger.
I'm a primary care doctor
at San Francisco
General Hospital.
One minute, okay?
WOMAN: Okay.
SCHILLINGER: When I started out
as a young doctor,
about one in 20 of my patients
had type 2 diabetes.
Now it's one in two.
NARRATOR: Diabetes undercuts one
of the most basic functions
of our bodies--
our ability to break food down
into nutrients,
including the sugar glucose
that provides energy.
- Okay.
NARRATOR: The hormone that
manages sugar levels is insulin.
♪ ♪
So, think of insulin
as the medicine
that you can't live without,
right?
Like a key that unlocks
the door to your cells
and allows the glucose
to enter your cells.
That keeps the level of sugar
in your blood in check
and your cells nourished.
NARRATOR:
This insulin-glucose cycle
is disrupted in diabetes.
In type 1 diabetes,
the immune system
attacks and destroys
the part of the pancreas
that makes insulin.
In type 2, the pancreas makes
too little insulin,
and the body resists
the insulin it has.
CLOSE:
It's really obvious
when your blood glucose
is too low,
why that's dangerous.
You know, you can't breathe,
you can't survive.
Um, you won't live very long
if you have blood sugar
that's too low.
Blood sugar that's too high
is equally dangerous,
if not more dangerous over time.
Diabetes is truly
a silent disease.
It could take up to 15 years
for someone with diabetes
to develop the first symptoms
that are related
to high blood-sugar levels.
You don't have a water and soap,
you want to use an alcohol pad.
NARRATOR: For many people, by
the time diabetes is diagnosed,
the damage is done--
damage that can include
blindness, heart disease,
strokes, even amputations.
NURSE: All right.
There's not a lot of things
more disfiguring
than, than losing a limb,
particularly a leg or a foot.
We now have a limb-salvage unit
at San Francisco
General Hospital
to handle the volume
of these amputation patients,
something ten years ago
would have been unheard of.
I've probably seen maybe
a thousand amputations.
As far as these things go,
it's healed really well.
- Yeah.
- And it looks good.
NARRATOR:
Dr. Schillinger's next patient
is a man with type 2 diabetes
who may be facing amputation.
- Monteil Lee?
- Yeah, hey, how you doing?
- Good to see you.
How long have you been
in the hospital this time?
- I've been here for a week.
- A week, okay.
- Since Monday, rather.
- Uh-huh.
SCHILLINGER:
Monteil Lee is a 36-year-old man
from the Fillmore District,
used to be the sort of
heart and soul
of African-American culture
in, in the Bay Area.
And like many young men,
really has had
very little to no contact
with the health care system,
doesn't go to doctors
for preventive care,
or anything, for that matter.
(music playing on speakers)
Kept living his, his life
as a young artist was doing,
which is making music.
(hip-hop music
playing on speakers)
So, now I want to talk
about your diabetes.
How old were you
when they told you?
- I was 28.
But I was experiencing
some things with my body
that I've never experienced
in life before.
- Mm-hmm.
- I'm going to the bathroom
over 30 times a day.
- Mm-hmm.
- And I'm just, like,
"Something's not right."
- You're peeing?
- But... yes.
But I'm very energetic.
I'm an on-the-go type of person,
and I'm starting
to feel sluggish
all these different days.
And I felt myself
leaving my body.
- I see.
- One of my cousins
rushed me to the hospital,
and they checked my levels,
and they was looking at me,
like,
"How are you even standing here
on your feet?
You're supposed to be
in a coma."
- Right.
- I thought I was about to die.
So, they told me
that I had diabetes.
And, at that moment,
my life changed.
- Mm-hmm.
Can we look at your foot?
- Yeah.
- Will that be all right?
- Mm-hmm.
I got an infection
on the top of my toe.
- Just out of nowhere?
- Yeah.
(winces): Ooh.
- Yeah, I can see that.
You got a, still have
a little shallow ulcer there.
And then it started
on this side here?
-Yup.
- And, but they said
you might lose the toe?
- Mm-hmm.
SCHILLINGER:
People with diabetes,
because they've got
a lot of sugar on their skin,
the fungus loves
to hang out there--
it's moist, it's warm,
it's sweet--
and they grow foot fungus,
athlete's foot,
but in a person with diabetes,
it can be the portal
to death, right?
So, the athlete's foot begins
to burrow in the skin
and create cracks in the skin,
and that's, like,
the perfect opportunity
for more virulent bacteria,
dangerous bacteria,
to enter into the skin
and begin to infiltrate
the entirety of the foot.
Okay, I think
you got to start...
I'm not your doctor here, right,
but I'm going to tell you,
you don't want to put
any weight on it.
- Yeah, I'm fighting it.
- Who's your regular doctor?
- I don't have one.
Uh-huh.
- Okay.
So, what I was going to suggest
is that I could take over
as your doctor.
- That would be great.
- All right.
- (chuckles)
I appreciate it.
- No, I want to hear that
you've not been on your foot
for three weeks is
what I want to hear next time.
- The best doctor
deserves the best patient.
- Exactly.
- That's how it goes.
- And I was going to say that.
- See, great minds
even think alike, too.
- So, so we got,
that's the clinic,
like, your primary care doctor.
I will become
your primary care doctor.
- Okay.
- Okay, my friend.
- Appreciate you.
- You, too, good luck.
- Thanks a lot.
♪ ♪
SCHILLINGER:
I talked to the surgeon,
and we both felt it was kind of
like a 50/50 proposition
as to whether he was
going to lose his toe or not.
It would really be dependent
on his behavior, his choices.
Would he stay off the foot,
like, completely off the foot?
Would he elevate the foot
higher than his heart?
Would he take the antibiotics
correctly and to completion?
Would he manage his diabetes?
Because that's perfect
for the bugs to keep growing--
they love the sugar.
So, it was a lot of ifs.
So, um...
You know, this is a fairly
typical amputation story.
I mean, it's...
I could tell it again and again.
The only thing that differs is
the person with the foot.
And in this case,
he's a very unique individual,
as many people are, but he's,
I think he's, he's very special.
WOMAN:
All right, here we go.
SCHILLINGER: If he can find
that story in himself...
LEE: This is so awesome,
I haven't smelled air in a week.
SCHILLINGER: ...I do believe
that this experience,
as, as terrible as it is,
actually may be
transformative for him.
It could go south, too.
(people talking in background)
DAN HURLEY:
150 years ago,
a doctor could go
most of their career
and maybe see one or two people
with diabetes.
It was just considered
a very rare disease,
and it had been
since ancient times.
NARRATOR: Records of diabetes
may go back to the pharaohs.
This papyrus describes
treating the disease
with seeds, honey,
and yellow ochre clay.
There were no better treatments
until 1921,
when insulin was discovered.
But insulin was still
a treatment, not a cure.
Even with new,
more effective drug formulas,
in the last two decades,
rates of both type 1 and type 2
have skyrocketed.
Everybody knows that type 2
diabetes has been increasing.
What people don't get
is that type 1--
it used to be called
childhood-onset diabetes--
has been increasing
at the same rate.
When I developed
type 1 diabetes in 1975,
I didn't meet anyone else
who had that disease
at my college.
I didn't meet friends,
I didn't have family
who had type 1 diabetes.
Today, I know so many people
with type 1
not because I wrote
a book about it,
but my neighbor down the block,
the, the girl around the corner,
the editor of my local paper,
the priest at my church.
NICOLE: My name's Nicole,
and I'm a type 1 diabetic.
People always say,
"You're type 1.
Is that the kind that's worse?"
Well, I have diabetes
complications,
and from where I'm sitting,
it doesn't matter
if you're type 1 or type 2,
both type 1 diabetics
and type 2 diabetics
can get complications.
And they're
the same complications.
NARRATOR: The complications
in diabetes
tend to accumulate slowly,
as the extra blood sugar
damages the eyes, the heart,
other organs bit by bit.
NICOLE: So, basically,
my blood sugar is in the 90s
and is trending down,
so that's what I'm watching.
NARRATOR:
For type 1s,
the complications can also be
immediate and disastrous.
The pancreas is
no longer making insulin.
Sugar is not getting out of
the blood and into the cells.
Your body is designed to have
blood sugar at a perfect level.
It's really incredible
how well the healthy body
regulates
the blood-sugar level--
not too high, not too low.
I think that no one prepares you
for, mentally,
what it's going to take to live
with something
that's so 24/7.
- Wonderful.
NICOLE: I've had diabetes
for 18 years,
and you always have to be
thinking.
You have to think
before you exercise--
"What's your blood sugar?"
Before you go to sleep,
In the middle of the night,
"What's your blood sugar?"
When you're sick,
"What's your blood sugar?
You know,
it, it never escapes you.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR:
Nicole's diagnosis started
with the classic symptoms
of diabetes,
so well known
that a 17th-century physician
called the disease
"the pissing evil."
I had to pee all the time,
and I was drinking a lot.
And I remember telling
one of my friends,
I said, I was, like, "There's
something wrong with me."
I was drinking,
it's like you're in a desert,
and you are...
You're so thirsty, like,
you can't stop.
From there,
I was telling my mom.
She was, like,
"I think we need to get you
tested for diabetes."
And I was, like,
"Diabetes, what's that?"
I didn't know what it was.
And she's just, like,
"We need to take you
to the doctor."
And she took me,
and right away,
they diagnosed me with diabetes,
and they started me on insulin
within days.
I actually, I didn't end up
in a coma.
A lot of people will end up
in a diabetic coma
and have to be hospitalized.
I think my blood sugar was,
like, maybe 375-ish,
somewhere around there.
So it wasn't you know, 800-plus.
So, I got lucky, so, yeah.
When you get diagnosed at 17,
it's hard.
I was so afraid to go low
that I kept myself high.
Because low blood sugars to me
meant I could die,
and specifically,
I could die in the night,
like, when I'm sleeping.
I am unconscious every night
when I go to sleep,
and I can't know
what my blood-sugar level is.
One time, I was alone
with our daughter,
who was then
about eight years old,
and she found me
sweating profusely
and unable to come to.
And she realized something
was very, very wrong with me.
She didn't know
what she was supposed to do.
She wasn't quite sure.
She knew I needed
something "sweet."
So, she went into the kitchen
and got marshmallow fluff
and began spooning it
into my mouth.
And she saved my life.
NICOLE: Someone
that doesn't have diabetes,
their blood sugars are stable.
They're consistent, just
kind of like a line like this.
But, with me, my blood sugar
could be up, down.
So, when it's up, it's high,
and when it's down, it's low,
and so the low blood sugars
can make me potentially
go into a diabetic coma.
And I was terrified.
So, I'd just, oh,
eat a bunch, you know,
right before I go to sleep,
and I'd be fine.
I think it was
deep-rooted denial.
♪ ♪
I skipped insulin injections.
I ate whatever I wanted.
I pretended
like I wasn't a diabetic.
I now have a list
of diabetes complications,
to include kidney disease,
which turned
into kidney failure,
which turned into,
now I am a dialysis patient.
I have to go to dialysis
three times a week
and have my blood filtered out.
If I don't do those things,
I'll die.
One of my least favorite
complications,
I have severe diabetic
proliferative retinopathy,
which is end-stage eye disease.
That's the kind
that steals vision.
And I don't know what's scarier,
my eyes or my kidney...
I guess the kidney disease
is what scares me the most,
because, you know,
the longer you're on dialysis,
the more the death rate
statistically goes up.
NARRATOR:
With no functioning kidneys
and a damaged pancreas,
Nicole is now in line
to replace both,
a rare dual transplant.
For now, she's doing
everything she can
to stay alive and be ready,
if donor organs
become available.
♪ ♪
NICOLE:
Now that I have kidney failure,
I also have to watch what I eat.
I have to now watch
potassium, sodium, phosphorus,
and vegetables
contain those things.
So, I actually have a chart.
Avocados, bananas--
I don't eat those at all.
That's, I just don't
touch those.
If I eat too much potassium,
it could stop my heart
and I can die.
So, that's why I don't
eat potatoes anymore.
I got yelled at
for eating too much kale.
And they're, like, "Do you
want this to jeopardize...?"
I'm, like, "Whoa."
I'm, like, "Okay,
no leafy greens, I got it."
If I could tell
my 17-year-old self,
my newly diagnosed self,
something, it would be,
"Do everything that the
doctors, professionals, say.
It's not worth it not to."
CLOSE:
So it's so possible
to live a long and
healthy life with diabetes.
It's possible by thinking
about how, how do we keep
our tanks full?
How do we be our best selves?
I've had type 1 diabetes
for almost 35 years,
and I have kids and a husband
and a great job.
A lot of people with
either type 1 or type 2
live well with the disease.
They're singers and actors and
professional sports figures
and major businesspeople
and political figures.
There's even a race-car driver
with diabetes.
But it takes constant attention,
because it's a complicated
and chronic disease.
LEE:
I come from a rough background.
Back in those days,
we'd run out of food.
We was eating syrup sandwiches,
sugar sandwiches,
when you just take the syrup
and put it on the bread.
Drunk Hawaiian Punch, Capri
Suns, all that type of stuff.
I'm a junk-food addict--
I eat candy, all type of sweets.
It's been a real battle
and a real struggle to where,
now, I'm at this point,
from not being able
to control bad habits.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR: Do bad habits
cause type 2 diabetes?
Not everyone who consumes a
lot of sugar gets the disease.
But sugary drinks and foods are
certainly a part of the problem.
♪ ♪
Some companies target
communities of color
with ads for sodas
and high-sugar snacks,
and these are the communities
with the highest
diabetes levels.
ANTHONY HATCH:
We know an awful lot
about the environmental
conditions
that lead to dramatically
increased prevalence
of type 2 diabetes.
It's living
in sugar-rich environments,
where people have inequitable
access to healthful food,
where people are living
increasingly sedentary lives.
These are the true causes
of not just diabetes,
but of chronic disease
in general.
LEE: For me, honestly,
it's overwhelming,
but I have to...
It's not like
I can get around it
without taking care of it.
So, I'm just dealing with it
the best way I can.
So now, waking up every day,
having to check blood
and make sure these levels
are correct
and all this different stuff.
I'm trying my best here.
Yeah, the more I do this,
I'm getting better.
I watched the doctors do this,
so now I'm trying to...
be just as good as them
wrapping it.
♪ ♪
(talks softly)
(exhales)
NARRATOR: Almost all people
with diabetes, 95%,
are type 2, like Monteil.
The remaining five percent
are type 1.
But what sets off the disease?
Type 1 is genetic,
perhaps triggered by a virus
or other environmental factors.
Type 2 is triggered
by many factors:
the person's genes,
their environment,
getting too little exercise,
gaining too much weight,
eating too much
unhealthy, sugary foods.
(bell tolling)
LAURA GRUESER: Here in
our little neck of the woods,
you can just look around
and see that we show love
to each other in our area
with food.
That's what we do.
We get together-- churches,
baby showers,
bridal showers, birthdays--
we're always eating.
When you come to our homes,
we say, "Come on in.
Let me fix you
something to eat."
It's how we were raised.
We don't get together
unless there's food.
And usually,
it's not really good choices.
I'm Laura Grueser, and
I'm the community health worker,
the lead, at the Meigs County
Health Department.
♪ ♪
I was diagnosed as being
pre-diabetic in 2012.
I didn't understand really
what the big deal was.
It wasn't until I started
doing all the research,
and I thought,
"Why shouldn't I use
"this knowledge that I've got?
"I can't teach somebody else
to live a healthier life
"and come home and eat
a bag of potato chips.
That's not right,
I can't do that."
And so to live as an example
for my patients,
my husband and I made
the final decision
to really get on board
and start eating healthier.
I'm able to take that back
to my patients
and say, "It really does work.
"It's evidence-based.
"You really can do something
about controlling
your own diabetes."
And then they feel like,
you know,
"If she can do it,
I can do this."
NARRATOR: Meigs County, Ohio,
is in Appalachia,
where diabetes rates
rise well above the
national average of ten percent,
as high as 15% or 16%.
Most of the diabetes here
is type 2.
One of the big things
in Meigs County
is the pride of the people here
and the independence.
It's very, very hard
for proud people to say,
"I can't do this,
I need some help."
And so I tell them, "Please,
just give me three months.
"Give me three months
out of your life,
"and listen to what I'm saying,
and get with this program.
"If it doesn't work,
"and you don't see any changes
in three months,
"I'll leave you alone.
And you can go on."
No one has ever done that.
Statistics show
that rural communities
have a higher incidence
of diabetes
than more of
a metropolitan area.
And they... one of the
reasons that surprised me
was because there's not enough
education out there
to actually tell people
something that I take
for granted.
- Looks like cucumber.
GRUESER: I had
a patient yesterday
who had never, he nor his wife
had ever had a zucchini.
I've been going into their home
for eight months.
So yesterday, they had zucchini
for the first time.
So, that's kind of
exciting to me.
Cook it on high
for four to six hours.
♪ ♪
CABALLERO: Type 2 diabetes
is closely linked
to the presence
of overweight or obesity,
because the more fat
we have in our body,
the more release of substances
that limit the ability
of insulin to do its job.
This is what we call
insulin resistance.
GRUESER: You can just
look around and see
that there are so many people
who are suffering from obesity.
So many people are, are
walking around
with a bottle of Mountain Dew
in their hands.
And I think that that's
a cultural thing here
for our community.
Are you in a good mood today?
- Yup.
- Am I going to have
to get rough with you?
- Yup.
(women laughing)
- Boy, I know that, don't I?
WOMAN: Those two are always
at it like that.
GRUESER: He's really afraid
of me.
...in pop.
So now, knowledge is power.
So now you can tell all
your family this, too.
So in one 20-ounce
bottle of Mountain Dew,
there are more than
18 teaspoons of sugar.
That's what it looks like.
When you're drinking
a bottle of Mountain Dew,
there, you're drinking
that much sugar.
MAN: Mm-hmm.
- Isn't that crazy?
- Yeah.
- And all pop is about the same.
♪ ♪
GRUESER: Every time I do
an intake, I always ask them,
"What do you think
caused your diabetes?"
And it doesn't matter
what their weight is
or what their eating program is,
it is always,
"Because my dad had it,"
or, "My mom had it,"
or, "My aunt had it,
my sister, or my brother."
So, everyone feels as though,
"I might as well
just give it up,
"because Dad had it,
and he died from it."
So, when they're given
that diagnosis,
it's a very sad thing
to witness.
HURLEY: Nobody gets blamed
for having cancer.
But with diabetes,
everyone acts like,
"Hey, it's your fault.
Why don't you lose some weight?"
Nobody says this
to people with heart disease,
to people with cystic fibrosis.
They don't blame
the, the victims.
And it's time to stop
victim-shaming
people with diabetes.
BONNIE: Hi.
GRUESER: How are you?
I have missed you.
- I'm okay.
NARRATOR: Victim-shaming
hurts people
who are already struggling.
Their bodies' ability to balance
blood sugars is impaired,
and they have
to reset that balance every day
with lifestyle changes
and drugs.
GRUESER: I'm going to get
your vitals real quick,
okay?
- Okay.
CABALLERO: So a good way
for most patients with diabetes,
whether that's type 1 or type 2,
to know what's going on
with their blood sugars
is to prick their fingers.
This is what we call
capillary glucose levels.
In general,
a level of 70 to 130 milligrams
per deciliter before meals
and less than 180 milligrams
per deciliter after meals--
two hours after any meal--
is what we recommend.
BONNIE: 371.
That's high.
MAN: That's high?
GRUESER: That's high.
- That's high.
Well, if it gets under 200,
I'm happy.
- Okay, okay.
- You know,
and it was 170
or something like that.
- Uh-huh.
- And then the next time,
it was, like, 210.
- Okay.
- Which, you know, that's,
that beats well over 300,
which is what it's been doing.
- It does.
We'll take baby steps.
We don't care how we get there.
That's true.
- You take the salt,
the carbs, and the, and the...
- And all you're left
with is a...
- The sweets, you know, there's
not much left that you can eat.
- Just, you know, a
brown paper bag or something.
- And, Lord, I love to eat.
I said, "There's a nice hay
field out there I think about."
- That's right.
(laughing)
- I was raised on meat
and potatoes, and I'm...
- It's hard, isn't it?
- Yeah, it is, it's hard.
- It's hard to change that.
GRUESER:
Bonnie, she has struggled.
She has really, really
struggled with the program.
She loves to eat out.
And as much coaching as
I give her on what to eat,
she really struggles with that.
(people talking in background)
BONNIE: I'm supposed to go
next Saturday to Olive Garden.
GRUESER: Oh, okay.
- To eat.
- I know you love Olive Garden.
- Love the chicken parmesan.
- Yes.
Yes, yes.
And you maybe want to ask them
if they have the chicken breast
that is not breaded.
- They might.
- They may have
a grilled chicken breast.
- They may have.
- That would be better.
GRUESER: I don't ever want
to tell somebody,
"You can't have that."
I want to be able to tell them,
"You really shouldn't have that,
but here's an alternative
for you."
I hate it
that you feel guilty...
- Oh, yeah.
- About going out
and enjoying yourself.
- Yeah.
- There are always going
to be options for you.
- It's a frustrating disease,
I know that.
- It is.
So one thing that people
with type 1 diabetes
and people with type 2 diabetes
have in common
is watching carbs.
It's not just how much sugar
you eat, like candy.
It's how much you eat that
your body turns into sugar,
which is anything
that has carbohydrates.
- Carbs in one cup of pineapple.
SIRI: 22 grams of total
carbohydrate in one cup chunks.
- Okay.
Carbs in bananas.
GRUESER: One of the things
that we do
in our diabetes education
is, we show patients
how to read food labels.
So, one serving size
is half a cup,
and there are four grams of
carbohydrates in half a cup.
So, that's a good choice.
- Yeah.
GRUESER: That gives them power
over what they're eating,
when they can make the choice,
"Do I put it in the cart or
do I put it back on the shelf?"
Here's one of the best things
that you can eat.
The plums.
- Okay, that's what I was...
- Because one plum only has
eight grams of carbohydrates
in the whole thing.
CLOSE: If you're eating
bread or toast or cake
or pie, or any candy
or anything with sugar,
that has a lot of carbs.
If you're eating lettuce
or protein,
that has no carbs.
And then there is
a long, long list in between
of how many carbs
different foods have.
And the better
that you can keep track of it,
the healthier that you'll be.
CAROLYN CHAPMAN: I found out
how much I didn't know
about diabetes.
I didn't understand
about counting the carbs.
Watch your sweets,
watch the sugar intake,
your fried foods.
That all affects your diet.
GRUESER: Of those three types,
which one's the best?
- This one.
- There you go.
We're learning, I should say,
to eat differently.
They soak all of
these fruits in sugar.
Oh, my goodness.
I can't even believe
that you picked that up.
That is evil.
We don't even want
to talk about them.
(Grueser laughing)
GRUESER:
Where to now?
JOHN:
We don't go for candy.
- Oh, yes, we don't
even need to go there, do we?
GRUESER:
One of my biggest pet peeves
is with our labeling
in the United States.
If it says "sugar-free,"
my patients pull that
off of the shelf,
put it in their cart,
and think,
"I can have eight or 12
of these cookies
because they're sugar-free."
They're not sugar-free.
It's, it's not true.
The serving size
is four cookies.
And in four, those four cookies,
there are 21 grams
of carbohydrates.
And it does have
the sugar alcohols.
It has sorbitol in it.
There's "sugar-free,"
in huge letters.
GRUESER:
The game is rigged.
Our labeling is done
in such a way
that it's almost
a lose-lose situation.
Because people think
that they're doing so well,
but they're really not.
(talking softly)
♪ ♪
DAN LIEBERMAN:
The average American eats
about 100 pounds
of sugar a year,
which means
that there are Americans
who actually eat more than
100 pounds of sugar a year.
We started off
as hunter-gatherers,
which we were
for millions of years.
A hunter-gatherer,
if he or she is lucky,
gets about ten pounds
of sugar a year.
So, we have an order
of magnitude increase
in the amount of sugar
that's available to us.
And we simply never evolved
to handle that much sugar.
A common phrase
is that genes load the gun
and environment
pulls the trigger.
Genes we inherit,
and they change very slowly.
But environments can change
really fast.
And what's happened is that
we still have the same genes
as our great-grandparents or
our great-great-grandparents.
But the environments in which
we live have shifted rapidly,
and our bodies
are poorly adapted
to those modern environments.
And as a result, we're
much more likely to get sick.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR:
As in Appalachia, in New York,
the food environment
sets the stage for diabetes.
KAREN WASHINGTON:
This is the tale of two cities.
Here in the Bronx,
we are surrounded
by unhealthy food.
We have the bodegas.
You open a door, and
the first thing that hits you
are the racks of cookies and
cakes and candies and sodas.
NARRATOR:
By some estimates,
New York City
has 10,000 bodegas--
small neighborhood stores that
often sell only processed foods.
In low-income areas, they can
be the only place to shop,
there are so few
full-service markets.
♪ ♪
WASHINGTON: And then you go into
more affluent neighborhoods.
And I'm walking to the store,
and there are the vegetables.
There are the healthy
food options.
♪ ♪
But the question I ask is, "Why?
"Why does it have
to be like that?
"Why don't people
have access to food?
"Why is it they can't afford
whole fresh vegetables?
"Why is it that supermarkets
or other stores
don't want to come
into low-income neighborhoods?"
And so, people are now calling
our community food deserts.
And it's, like, "Wait a second.
You're getting it wrong,
because we do have food."
What we don't have
is healthy food options.
We're inundated with fast food,
junk food, and processed food.
And so, we need to speak about,
the heart of the problem
is that.
LIEBERMAN: Now we live in this
bizarre modern environment
for the first time ever
in the history of any species.
We have access
to unlimited calories,
but we still have
those ancient cravings.
We've created foods
that are processed.
We remove the fiber,
so they go straight
into our bloodstreams.
You have all these
incredibly energy-rich foods,
devoid of fiber,
filled with sugar.
It's astonishing,
the transformation
that we've been able to create
through industrializing
our food.
And it's that access
to all that energy in those
particular kinds of foods
that underlies the recent
epidemic of type 2 diabetes.
People didn't use
to get that disease.
But today, we get it because of
this change in our environment.
(music playing faintly
on speakers)
WASHINGTON:
In the Bronx,
one of the number-one
diet-related diseases
is type 2 diabetes.
Everyone knows a family member,
a friend, a colleague
who suffers
from type 2 diabetes,
which can be prevented.
My brother had type 2 diabetes.
♪ ♪
My brother, at one time, was on,
like, 30 different medications.
I told, I said,
"Look, you have hypertension.
You have heart disease."
I said,
"We can work it together.
"We can do exercise.
"You know, we can change diet.
We'll work it together."
February 2010, that was it.
He passed away.
So, I firsthand know the effects
of having a person with diabetes
in my family,
and it was my brother.
♪ ♪
I moved to the Bronx
back in 1985.
Across the street
was an empty lot.
And I see a man
with a shovel and a pick.
And he says, "I'm thinking
about putting a garden."
Whoo, I was so excited.
I said, "Oh, can I help?"
I was so excited,
because a garden?
Wow, that would make
the neighborhood
really, really look good.
When I first put that
tomato seed in the ground,
I was mesmerized, the
fact that it grew on a vine.
My relationship to a tomato
was that it was in a store.
I took it off the vine,
and I bit into it,
and it just changed my world.
The taste of sunshine,
of juiciness, of sweetness.
I just was so enthused that
I wanted to grow everything.
And this year,
we're celebrating 30 years
from an empty lot
full of garbage
to, now, a community garden
which is the glue
of this community.
♪ ♪
Hi, girls.
Are you all hungry?
(bird squawking)
(chicken clucks angrily)
WASHINGTON: No fighting.
So after it rains,
I like to come in and dig,
'cause it brings up
the earthworms.
WOMAN: Oh, yeah,
wait till you find more out
about what happens
in this garden.
You'll be, like,
"I'm happy all the time."
WASHINGTON: Hi, hi, everybody.
GIRL: Miss Karen.
WASHINGTON:
So, I'm the farmer here
at the Garden of Happiness.
How many people eat food?
GIRL: Everybody.
- How many people
eat healthy food?
What are you not allowed to do?
BOY: Eat junk.
- Excellent.
Eat junk, okay.
And so, we're talking
about junk.
What's junk?
(children respond)
- Exactly, and so
you know what happens
when people eat a lot
of stuff with sugar?
GIRL: You could, like, get,
like... you could get...
GIRL: Diabetes?
- Diabetes,
that's a big word, diabetes.
Come on, let's go
see the chickens.
CHILDREN: Yay!
(talking in background)
WASHINGTON: If we go, if we're
going to see the chicken,
we got to make chicken noise,
like...
(all imitating
chickens clucking)
WASHINGTON: In the garden,
I just want people to understand
where their food comes from.
We are surrounded
by fast-food restaurants.
But the garden, we have a choice
to be able to grow
healthy food options.
What should you eat
to help with the diabetes?
BOY (yells): Healthy food!
- Healthy food.
And do you see healthy food
in the garden here?
ALL: Yes.
- Where's the healthy food
in the garden?
BOY: Over there.
- Over there?
Over here, with the chickens?
WASHINGTON:
When you're starting to see
adult-onset diabetes
in children,
then that's an alarm
that needs to go off.
This is directly related
to diet.
It's very important
for communities to understand
that diabetes is not
some predestined effect
of being black.
Our genes do not work
in a vacuum.
They always only ever do
what they do
in a given environment.
So we've got to turn back
and look very carefully
at the environments
that we live in
and how they are built,
how they are structured
to create inequity.
WASHINGTON: I live
in a community
with limited access
to growing food.
I'm still marginalized
because of the color of my skin.
I need to be actively engaging
on breaking down those barriers
and working on some
of the injustices that I see.
NARRATOR: Karen estimates
that thousands of children
have come through the garden,
setting them
on a better path to health.
And the garden has joined
a weekly farmers' market
to provide fresh vegetables
to the community.
- All right,
it's time to go to the market.
All right.
♪ ♪
WASHINGTON: One thing that
the community takes pride of
is that we're at their service.
And I have plums.
WASHINGTON:
No one goes away hungry.
We never turn away anyone.
Someone comes in,
"Miss, I'm so hungry.
I haven't eaten anything,
can I have an apple?"
What are you going to do?
Because for people
to come to ask for food
when they are hungry,
they're at their lowest.
And so, our farmers' market
has been
that type of market
for the community,
giving people back
their dignity.
(people talking in background)
WASHINGTON: Making sure
that people understand
that this is their market.
All right, take care.
WOMAN: Those tomatoes,
how do you eat them?
WASHINGTON: Just slice them.
- Just, and eat them regular?
- Just eat them regular.
WOMAN: I want to live
a little longer.
- All right, have a blessed day.
- You, too, darling.
♪ ♪
This is what I'm up against.
CABALLERO: Where good food
is not available,
then the incidence
of diabetes goes up.
Type 2 diabetes affects
racial and ethnic minorities
at a higher rate.
In general, Native Americans,
African-Americans,
Latinos, Asian-Americans
have a higher rate
of type 2 diabetes
than the white population.
(TV playing in background)
LEE: I used to think
only old people got diabetes.
Now I'm seeing more of the
younger kids such as myself
and people even younger than me.
MAN: (on TV): Good evening,
I'm Dan Ashley.
WOMAN: (on TV):
And I'm Kristen Sze.
Let's give you now
four more views
of the unhealthy air
all across the...
NARRATOR: Monteil is struggling
to get his diabetes
under control.
He's not making much
as a musician,
especially since
he has to stay at home.
That makes it hard
to buy healthy foods.
For now, to save money,
he's living with his aunt.
But he knows he still has a
chance to save his infected toe.
And he has another advantage.
SCHILLINGER: The other thing
about Monteil
is that he, he doesn't fit
the stereotype--
this is a stigmatized
stereotype, to be clear--
which is that type 2 diabetes
happens
in people who let themselves go,
right?
People who are obese,
who are overweight,
who don't exercise.
But he's thin.
I mean, he's... you wouldn't
look at him and say,
"This is a guy
who's got type 2 diabetes,"
or, "This is a guy who's even
on the path to type 2 diabetes."
But we are seeing this
more and more.
We see a lot of people
who are thin
who have type 2 diabetes.
And I think his upbringing,
in terms of the added sugars
that he was exposed to,
that can overwhelm any system.
I think the image of a thin
person with type 2 diabetes
is going to slowly become one
that we become more
and more used to.
NURSE:
Okay, Mr. Lee,
so we're going to go ahead
and check your sugar now.
(people talking in background)
NURSE:
So, Mr. Lee, that's 428.
And you said you didn't
eat nothing, right?
Get you a little bit of water.
Doctor should be
with you shortly, okay?
SCHILLINGER:
All right,
talk to me now
about how you've been doing.
Because I saw you, what,
maybe, like, ten days ago?
LEE:
I've been doing a lot better.
SCHILLINGER: Oh, good.
What does that mean,
"Doing better"?
- I'm chilling at the house,
feet up, watching TV.
- But you cannot put any weight
on the foot, okay?
- All right.
- That's just like, like,
completely prohibited.
Not for me, for you.
- Mm-hmm.
- Okay, we're going to get
some scissors here.
We'll, we'll do that.
- Yeah, this is
my platinum wrapping right here.
- That's a good job, actually.
You did that?
- Yep, all by myself.
All right, man.
He was hospitalized.
They were actually going
to amputate,
but he managed to avoid it.
- Good.
SCHILLINGER: And now
the question is, you know,
is, is this thing
going to close?
The big reveal.
Do you want to lie back,
or you're good?
- I'll sit back.
- You can be as comfortable
as you want to be.
All right, let's...
this is the...
This is the, the area
right here.
You know,
this is looking damn good.
- So you know I've been trying
to stay off of it, right?
WOMAN: That's great,
that's the best treatment.
SCHILLINGER:
This is looking, like,
this was wide open.
WOMAN: Oh.
The thing has closed up.
- Wow.
- It's closed up.
LEE: Is that right?
- You want to...
I mean, I, like,
can you sit up here?
This is all healed, look.
Am I right?
WOMAN: Yeah,
that looks beautiful.
Yeah.
LEE: Whoa.
WOMAN: That's fantastic.
SCHILLINGER: Who needs the home
nursing when you got you?
This is fantastic.
All right,
this is really exciting.
You were down, remember?
You were down
in the second half,
but you were coming back,
the fourth quarter.
You're Aaron Rodgers, whatever,
you are at the ten-yard line
with 13 seconds left to go.
You got two plays.
You're in the scenario,
and you can make
the right choice or not.
And so you've been
making the right choice.
Just make it even better.
I think if you do what you're
doing and keep that foot up,
and do not, do not
take out the garbage,
do not help out with that stuff,
this is going to close.
You're super-close.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR: "Super-close"
is not all the way home,
and Monteil knows it.
LEE: The doctor was telling me
just one little small anything
can cause another infection,
possibly amputation.
That's what I'm trying
to prevent.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR: Nicole is also
trying to stay healthy.
And for her, as for Monteil,
the stakes are high.
NICOLE: My doctor had said,
"You're going to go blind."
And I was, in my mind, I was,
like, "I'm not going to..."
Like, I just,
I didn't want to go blind
so I started taking care
of myself.
I have an endocrinologist,
my diabetes doctor.
I have a kidney doctor,
I have a retina specialist,
and an eye surgeon.
I have all these doctors.
Okay, so I'll see you
in three months.
- Sounds good.
- Okay, thank you.
- Thank you.
NICOLE: I feel like a
professional patient because...
All I do is go to the doctor.
HATCH: I have had type 1
diabetes for going on 27 years.
The only guard against
long-term complications
was to stay on it
and be vigilant.
And that, that, honestly,
over all these years,
that hypervigilance has
its own emotional effect,
the exhaustion of having
to constantly be aware
of what your blood sugar
is doing--
all those concerns
never really go away.
- Thanks for
answering my questions.
- Uh-huh, no problem.
There has been regret and
shame and feelings, right?
Like, because in my mind,
I'm just, like, "Oh, why,
I did this to myself?"
NARRATOR: To find
a supporting community
to help with her feelings-- and
to offer her help to others--
Nicole has turned
to social media.
NICOLE: I think diabetes can be
a very lonely disease.
Social media connects me to
other people that are like me.
(on speaker): Hi,
Happy World Diabetes Day.
My name is Nicole,
and I'm 35 years old.
Currently, I am listed
for a kidney...
kidney-pancreas transplant.
NICOLE: The more I was posting,
the more messages I would get.
"The best way to deal
with diabetes complications?
"Prevent them to begin with.
"This stuff doesn't have
an end date, it keeps going.
"This is why I desperately
want a double transplant,
kidney and pancreas."
If you have diabetes,
please get your eyes checked,
please check your blood sugars,
please do what you need to do,
so that you don't end up
in this situation.
NICOLE: Even if I can help
one person by sharing my story
and showing them
what this looks like,
then, then it'll be worth it.
Because, like, I already know
it's cut years off my life,
so...
CABALLERO:
When you are diagnosed
with type 1 diabetes
as a teenager,
this is a difficult time in life
for everybody.
Ironically, someone could be
diagnosed with diabetes
much earlier in life,
but because they have
the support from their parents
and their families, they
could have very good control.
TOBY MILGROME: And I'm just
going to see how it's going.
All right, give it a stir.
There you go.
All right, there you go,
there's the carbohydrates.
ED DAMIANO:
So, David, we need to check
on the blood-sugar situation.
- Oh, yeah, you want to
check yourself beforehand?
ED: Where's the Dexcom?
TOBY: Do you have a sensor?
DAVID: In my pocket.
David was an infant when he
developed type 1 diabetes.
Daddy came to the rescue.
TOBY: Looks sad about it.
- Daddy came and got you.
Hello, Baby David.
GIRL: Daddy.
Do you want some?
ED:
He was about 11 months old,
and my wife, Toby, was, was a
young pediatrician at the time,
and so she had a really keen eye
for problems in children.
TOBY: One thing that had
happened, which was quite scary,
is, I went to get him
out of the car seat,
and when I went to get him,
he was just kind of staring,
you know, vacant--
eyes open but vacant.
I mean, it's very alarming,
very unusual behavior.
ED:
So she brought him in to clinic.
His blood sugar was 800,
which is eight times
the normal blood-sugar level.
She collected him,
put him in the car,
raced out the door,
and said, you know,
"David has diabetes, and our
lives have changed forever."
TOBY: When your child
is diagnosed with diabetes
as an infant,
you have to do everything.
Diabetes care is 24/7.
It does not take the night off.
David is going to be
one year old in a few days.
- (sneezes)
TOBY: And two days ago, he was
diagnosed with diabetes.
ED: The task was upon us to
manage his blood-sugar levels.
We really had two tools
at our disposal:
We had insulin
and we had glucose.
Sugar, basically--
carbohydrates,
which is in foods
like fruit, juices...
Foods that would raise
blood sugar, carbohydrates,
we would use to keep his blood
sugar from going too low.
And then insulin was delivered
to bring his blood sugar down.
So these things are working
to oppose one another.
And the reason
you need the carbohydrates
is because you can very often
overdose insulin
just a little bit.
But even a small amount
of insulin can be lethal.
We were injecting him
with insulin with a needle
probably seven times a day,
and we were checking
his blood sugar 15 times a day.
That's how we started.
When we checked his blood sugar,
we used his fingers
and his toes,
so if he was playing with blocks
in the middle of the room,
I'd come up,
and I'd poke him in a toe.
He had bruises up
and down his arms
for those first two months when
we were giving him injections.
And that was something that
really was hard for us to see.
(David and Ed laughing)
ED: You're constantly
in this tension
between high blood sugar
and low blood sugar,
because neither extreme
is acceptable.
♪ ♪
TOBY: There was so much work
to be done.
And so all of my faculties
were focused
on taking care
of this little boy.
I guess with my training, it was
just too hard to think about,
that he would be compromised
because I didn't do a good job.
And with Ed's personality,
that wasn't going to happen.
And I just thought that was,
that was not a tenable situation
for a kid this age.
You're kind of plummeting.
This is a guy in free-fall.
This is his glucose level
over the past,
roughly, three hours.
You can see the fact
that he's going down
means that if he weren't
about to eat, he could go low.
But fortunately, we're going
to be feeding him
with rice and things
that will make him go higher.
DAVID: So, I put the
test strip in the meter,
I draw up some blood.
If it works.
I just scoop up a little
into the test strip.
And...
104.
(Ed laughing)
ED: Ready? Go!
Come on, let's go get him.
- Oh, his tail is down.
ED: The scariest prospect
that we as parents face
is this phenomenon
called dead-in-bed syndrome.
With people
with type 1 diabetes,
there's a small number of people
who go to bed at night,
and then they don't wake up.
(basketball bouncing)
Nice.
ED: And there's good evidence
for this being a result
of very seriously
low blood sugar
while they're sleeping.
And so someone goes to sleep
at night,
they've a little bit
too much insulin on board,
they go to bed, and they just,
they, their heart stops.
Looks like you flattened out
at around 75.
All the way across.
ED: We can take good care
of David, day and night,
24/7, seven days a week,
but what happens
when he goes to college?
I wouldn't be there,
my wife wouldn't be there,
to manage his blood sugars
for him,
or to help him take care
of his diabetes.
♪ ♪
And that overriding concern,
worry,
and the fear that I had,
that really inspired in my mind
the idea
of building a bionic pancreas,
a system that would basically
take care of his diabetes for us
in our absence, automatically,
better than we could and
more safely than we could.
I like that.
ED: The fact that Toby
is a pediatrician,
I was an engineer,
that's really what started us
down that path.
A dad's invention
to save his diabetic son
could change the lives
of millions of people
with diabetes.
It is today's Big Idea.
Ed Damiano developed
the bionic pancreas.
How confident are you
that your dad can meet this goal
and make this deadline to get
you off to college safely?
I don't doubt that he can do it.
It's definitely
very challenging,
but if anyone could do it,
my dad could.
♪ ♪
ED: Type 1 diabetes,
prior to the discovery
and purification of insulin,
it was a death sentence.
♪ ♪
It was a more grave diagnosis
than cancers.
Basically, what would happen
is, people would waste away.
They'd lose
all of their muscle mass,
and ultimately,
they would just die.
And so insulin in itself
is not a cure,
but it's an extremely
valuable medicine.
HURLEY: It wasn't until
the early 20th century
when insulin was
finally discovered.
So, Fred Banting hooks up
with Charles Best
at the University of Toronto,
and they started
animal experiments.
They finally figured out
how to take a pancreas
from a cow
and extract the insulin.
VIKAS SAINI:
At that time,
it was crystal-clear
that this was a huge discovery
that would save
millions of lives.
And it was crystal-clear
that you could charge
whatever the market would bear.
And Banting and Best
were very concerned
that people not be gouged.
So, they went to the University
of Toronto,
they arranged for the patent,
and then the patent was sold
to Eli Lilly for one dollar.
And what they said was,
"We don't want this to be
a moneymaker for us.
"We want to make sure
that insulin is affordable
for everybody who needs it."
Now, that was in the 1920s.
NARRATOR:
A half-century later,
insulin costs were still
quite moderate.
A type 1 diabetic might spend
around $200 a year on the drug.
Then the price of insulin
began to rise, rapidly.
ANCHOR:
More than 29 million Americans
live with diabetes every day,
and for some
six million of them,
insulin is
a life-or-death medication.
Between 2002 and 2013,
the price more than tripled
to more than $700 per patient.
In the last 20 years, the price
of insulin has gone up tenfold.
It is among
the most expensive medicines
that are required
to keep people alive.
If you don't have
health insurance,
you cannot afford insulin
in this country right now.
It's just prohibitively
expensive.
NARRATOR:
Without insurance,
some patients report
spending
$1,000 or more a month
on insulin.
For people
who can't afford that,
the consequences may be deadly.
WOMAN:
Kid's tee-ball team.
BRITTANY SMITH:
Alec had this smirk
that just kind of lit up a room.
And in pictures,
you can't help but notice it.
JAMES HOLT:
He was so little, yep.
- It was Animal Kingdom.
- Yep.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
Alec was an amazing person.
He was a jokester, he was always
pulling pranks on somebody
or doing something goofy
to make you laugh or smile.
♪ ♪
Halloween.
- Halloween.
BRITTANY:
Look at that.
♪ ♪
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
Yeah...
So, Alec-- just before
he was turning 24--
was feeling
like he was getting sick.
They diagnosed him on
the spot with type 1 diabetes.
ALEXIS HOLT:
I remember him crying initially.
Like, he was really strong,
but then he kind of broke down,
and he realized, you know,
being a diabetic,
he had to completely change.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
You know, with him being 24,
an active young man, I thought,
"Oh, how's he ever going
to manage this?
"He's going to have
to change his lifestyle,
"he's going to have to change,
you know, basically everything,
his eating habits."
But he, he did well.
He adjusted really well.
I was surprised.
December of 2016,
he accepted a job promotion.
ALEC HOLT:
Walking in the house.
And this is my crib.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: He was going
to have a steady income,
he was going to be able
to afford,
you know, living on his own.
ALEXIS: I think Alec
was very determined
to do right by my parents
and show them that
they've raised a, a young man,
a hard-working man, that
could take care of himself.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
He turned 26,
so he was no longer eligible
to be under
my, my insurance policy.
We went to the pharmacy
the first time
to pick up his insulin.
Without my coverage,
his bill was $1,300.
He didn't have $1,300
in the bank,
so he left the pharmacy
without his insulin
and...
started rationing what little
bit of insulin he had left,
hoping to stretch it out
till payday.
He didn't tell any of us
that he was doing this.
I think he was enjoying
his, his freedom of living
on his own for the first time,
so, I, I think that's
why he didn't ask for help.
I don't think he knew
that not taking
the required amount of insulin
would lead to death.
♪ ♪
It was absolutely horrifying.
This is hard.
I just miss my son.
I think we all would be doing
anything to get our son back,
our brother back.
♪ ♪
BRITTANY:
That week and after that moment,
I mean, it changed us all
forever.
(sighs)
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
It still really sometimes
doesn't feel real.
- (breathes deeply)
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: It feels like
maybe Alec is just on vacation.
And then there's moments
where I wake up,
and I'm, like, "My son is gone.
I'm not going to see him
anymore."
CLOSE: There shouldn't be
any question
about whether insulin
is a human right.
It obviously is.
Everybody in the world
should have access
to exactly how much they need.
And if you can't pay
for insulin,
you're back where we were
before Banting and Best--
you die.
BRITTANY:
So, this is the memorial garden
that we created
in honor of Alec.
And we will keep fighting
in his honor, in his memory.
SAINI:
Imagine yourself being a citizen
in a town in the desert
where there's no water
for hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of miles,
and the only way
you can get water is
by going out and purchasing it.
And imagine if there were
a handful of companies
in that town
that were selling water,
and they had
a monopoly on water.
Well, the entire community
of people with diabetes
is in that boat.
In 1996, insulin cost $21.
20 years later,
it cost $255.
You have to ask yourself,
"Why has the price
been going up?"
So, what you get is pricing
that reflects the power of the
people selling the product
and the lack of power
of the people
who absolutely need the product.
The pharmaceutical companies,
the big three
that manufacture insulin--
that's Eli Lilly,
Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi--
if you look
at the reported revenues
from these companies
on their insulin products,
now globally, they're up
in the tens of billions.
But you still hear
story after story
of patients who are rationing.
- Yeah.
- Patients who are harmed
because they can't afford
their insulin.
How do you make sure
every patient
can get the medicine they need?
- Yeah, well, we're, you know,
deeply bothered by that.
The facts you lay out are true.
The list prices have gone up.
Our net pricing is
basically flat since 2009.
Where's all that money
going in the middle?
It's going to negotiators
in the middle,
but not to patients,
who are increasingly
subjected to the list price.
And they have to make choices
like that
that they shouldn't
have to make.
NARRATOR:
"Negotiators in the middle"
refers
to pharmacy benefits managers,
a key part
of the drug pricing system.
As the insulin manufacturers
explained to Congress,
they set the list prices
for insulin.
But then pharmacy benefits
managers negotiate rebates
that are supposed
to lower consumer costs.
Despite the investment
that we make in rebates,
some patients, including those
with insurance,
end up paying list price
or close to it
at the pharmacy counter.
As a manufacturer,
Novo Nordisk has no control
over what insurance...
what insured patients pay
at the pharmacy counter.
So despite this ever-increasing
rebates that we pay,
patients don't get the full
benefits of those rebates
at the pharmacy counter.
This needs to change.
Patients are rightfully angry
about rising out-of-pocket costs
for many medicines, and
we all have a responsibility
to address a system that is
clearly failing too many people.
NARRATOR: All three of the
manufacturers blamed the system,
not their list pricing.
SAINI:
So everybody's pointing fingers,
and in that environment,
it's easy to point a finger
at the PBMs,
the pharmacy benefit managers,
because they got plenty
to answer for.
But the same is true of
the pharmaceutical agencies.
Eli Lilly tonight is planning
on selling a cheaper version
of its top-selling insulin,
Humalog.
The drug maker hopes this will
ease the financial strain
for patients.
But an advocacy group says
much bigger changes are needed.
NARRATOR: The manufacturers,
under public pressure,
have supported programs
to cap insulin costs.
But they're not
available to everyone.
And people without insurance,
like Alec,
may still pay full list price.
SAINI:
Pharmaceutical companies.
It's their product,
it's their price,
and it's their customers
that are dying
'cause they can't afford
their product.
That makes no sense.
And I think it's
a matter of responsibility.
Own up to what's going on.
People who have no insurance,
all sorts of people
fall through the cracks.
These are casualties
of a broken system.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR:
In a broken system,
it's even harder
to follow the rules.
(music playing on speakers)
LEE:
I mean, it feels great
to be back in, in the,
in the studio,
active, working
on good music again.
Got some good news
from the doctor,
saying I'm healing right,
everything's coming along.
Here I am with Dr. Schillinger
all excited,
talking about, "Man, it look
like everything is closed up."
And we felt a little bit
of an opening still,
but, like he said, it's 80%
to 90% closed back, so...
I'm not 100%,
but I'm getting close.
So, it's definitely
a great feeling
to be able to be back
doing what I love.
♪ But I'm still out here ♪
♪ Oh, my God,
I'm going crazy ♪
♪ No way can I get left behind ♪
♪ I'm going crazy ♪
MAN: You better hope he doesn't
see you, see this video,
because you've been standing up
this whole time.
- Yeah, I know, man,
I'mma get in trouble,
but at least he can see
I'm doing something positive
and enjoying myself
while I'm doing it.
(TV playing in background)
LEE: While I'm at the house,
doctor's orders
to stay off my foot,
so it's like a bed rest thing.
It's been challenging,
very challenging.
And I'm kind of like
having that type of tug of war
with wanting to be on my feet,
but having to stay off of it,
you know?
So, it's been a challenge,
but I'm maintaining,
staying prayed up,
and I've been getting blessed.
Hi, son.
- Hi.
- How are you?
- Good.
How was school today?
LEE: My son,
his name is Monteil.
He's a junior,
has my whole name.
His nickname is Lil Money,
everybody calls him Lil Money.
What's up, fella?
- What's up?
- Not much--
Daddy just chilling.
What's wrong?
- I was praying
that you wouldn't have
to get your toe cut off.
- Yeah, it did.
- And my prayer came true.
- Yeah, see, that was good.
Daddy glad you was able to pray
for me, too,
because I was scared.
That's what my main worry is,
is for you to do good in school.
- And play sports.
- And also take care
of yourself.
- And then follow my dreams?
- Yep.
And to take of yourself,
because health is wealth,
and Daddy don't want you to be
sick like me,
with this disease that I got,
so you got to..
- I'm not eating too much sugar.
- And you got to eat
your vegetables and drink milk.
And drink a lot of water,
so your body
and your bones can be strong.
LEE:
My son, I love him to death.
He's, like, my whole world.
So I'm talking to him
about not eating so much candy
and the sweet stuff
that could build up and might
make you feel good now,
but affects your body later-type
stuff, so he's learning.
Let's see, can Daddy make one,
see do I still got it?
Uh-oh, too short.
LEE: He's kind of alert
now to what's going on.
Look at that!
I'm flat, son, there I go.
Monteil, at really
the prime of his life,
at the age of 36, almost 37,
he's facing a really
big challenge,
which is,
is he going to lose his foot?
LEE: Look,
here's the famous guy.
SCHILLINGER: You feeling me?
Hey, buddy.
- How you doing, Doc?
- Good to see you.
- You, too.
Tell me about... the last time,
we talked about
the insulin, right?
- Yeah, I need,
I need more pens, too,
and I think I just dropped
the two, last two I had
in my Uber, when I jumped out.
- Oh, that's not good.
- I know.
- That's not good, 'cause
they're not going to fill that.
'Cause that's expensive.
But we'll try.
Just to be frank with you,
I love you,
but we're, we didn't make any
progress since the last visit.
You didn't pick up
your cholesterol medicine.
- Yeah, I know.
- You didn't change
your insulin.
I'm not, I'm not scolding you.
- I know.
- What I'm doing is,
I'm just saying realities.
- I'm thinking about personally
just changing my diet.
I was about to fast for 30 days.
- Ooh.
What do you mean by fasting?
- I'm trying to just...
water and juice.
- Okay, so that will kill you.
That's off the table, okay,
that, this is...
- That'll kill me?
- Yes, that will kill you.
And I'm not joking.
You have diabetes, okay?
You need to be on insulin.
Your problem is
the kind of food you're eating.
- Yeah.
- But I think that's probably
because of the income problem
you have, too.
- Yeah, right.
- So what I would say is,
let's get you some food
and some income.
And then you can make
some better choices
around things that will
actually make your body healthy.
But I pray you don't fast.
We want you making slow,
careful adjustments
at the right time
in the right way.
Okay?
- Okay
Don't go be on a superhero
in that regard.
- No, no, no.
I remember a lot of days, I was
just, like, ready to give up.
And I was, like...
- I know you were.
- I can't give up--
I had a talk with my son
that kind of tripped me out,
too, like.
Just to let me know that it's
on his mind as well as mine.
When I see that he's concerned,
it just make me
want to fight harder.
Pretty much.
Yep.
♪ ♪
SCHILLINGER: I was asked
a number of years ago to serve
in a public-health capacity
for the California Department
of Public Health
to direct the diabetes
prevention and control program.
And it was
a very challenging job.
(in video): We need
to spend less on health care
and more on the social
determinants of health
that disproportionately
affect minority communities.
The health field
has to talk more
about healthy food access,
and...
SCHILLINGER: Whenever I tried
to take the step back
and look at the bigger picture
that was causing
the type 2 diabetes epidemic--
the food systems, the poverty,
the food insecurity--
when I tried to bring these
things up with policymakers,
it was glazed eyes,
and I was doing it
till I was blue in the face.
And it was then I realized
that maybe
just, I'm not the guy to be
transmitting this information,
'cause clearly,
it's not effective.
Maybe I really need to turn
to the community
and identify
community spokespeople
who could be powerful voices
for change from within.
...at large or just
Oakland in general.
SCHILLINGER:
And that realization
really led to the creation
of what's now called
the Bigger Picture Campaign,
which is a collaboration
with youth of color,
poets, who really tell the story
about the bigger picture
behind the
type 2 diabetes epidemic.
E.J. WALLS: So, try to jot down
any, like, last-minute stuff
you're thinking of...
For... raise your hands in here,
how many people here know
somebody with type 2 diabetes?
One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven out of eight,
That's, like, what?
90+% of the room.
Right, that's wild.
WALLS: The art of being able
to illustrate the urgency
of an issue through words
in a way that, like,
people otherwise
wouldn't, wouldn't be able
to hear it or process it,
is really important,
and I think
that it's an opportunity
to turn heads to the issue
of type 2 diabetes
in the way that, like, hasn't
necessarily been done.
MAN: Oh, wait.
SCHILLINGER: So,
I'm a primary-care doctor
at San Fran General Hospital,
taking care of a lot of people
with type 2 diabetes.
It used to be that the only
diabetes kids had was type 1.
Like, if you ever said, "I got
a kid with type 2 diabetes,"
and you were a doctor,
they would be, like,
"Wow, write that up
for some amazing journal.
This is such a rare thing."
We now see among youth of color,
the majority
of the new cases of diabetes
are type 2 diabetes.
How does it impact children and
young people in a daily sense?
Like, is it, does it create
other health issues,
does it, like,
affect their lifespan?
Like, I'm just wondering
what are the, like...
SCHILLINGER: Having diabetes?
- Yeah.
We've discovered that type 2
diabetes in a young person
is more aggressive
than in an older person.
What I mean by that is, you get
the complications of diabetes,
the consequences of it
a lot sooner
and a lot more frequently,
and you just go
from head to toe.
You can have strokes, blindness.
So, keep going,
tooth decay, tooth loss,
need for dentures early in life.
Heart attack.
Number-one cause
of heart attack-- diabetes.
Kidney failure, dialysis.
And then numbness in your feet,
which leads to amputations.
It's, like, hundreds of
thousands of amputations a year
in the United States
from diabetes.
So, it's insidious
and slow, progressive.
So, it, it's nasty stuff.
♪ ♪
WOMAN: So, we're going
to transition
to, like, ten minutes
of writing.
So, what do you reach for
when you're hungry
and/or what reaches for you?
WOMAN: Oh, wow.
- Yeah.
Would anyone would like to share
or bless us with some words?
GRETCHEN CARVAJAL: Okay,
you guys are staring at me.
When I'm hungry,
the first instinct isn't to eat,
but it's to ask myself
if I need to,
as if my body wasn't
calling out to me.
Being hungry feels like...
CARVAJAL: So, the Bigger Picture
project is a collaboration
between Youth Speaks
and Dr. Dean Schillinger
in which we do workshops based
around health
and food accessibility with
our young folks with poetry.
So, it sounds a little,
like, disconnected,
but it's really crazy
how connected it is.
Your relationship with health
is also your relationship
with your community;
your relationship with health
is also your relationship with
your family and with your body.
SARAH:
But the bigger picture
is counting quarters
to make ends meet.
It is choosing between rent
and this month's groceries.
It is my mother turning
government beans
into memory of homeland.
It is her strict hand keeping
soda cans out of our fridge,
knowing what a fountain of sugar
can make of our insides.
CARVAJAL: I want to be able
to eat without second-guessing.
Without thinking about
a smaller version of myself.
Without thinking about food
as a weapon or a setback.
I want to be able
to be hungry and eat
without feeling
like I'm killing myself.
My body is a landmine
of insecurities,
my bloodline
a generation of curses,
a system that nobody
has been able to break.
When I'm hungry, I think
about the bodies of women
in my life,
serving and eating last.
(others snapping and reacting)
SCHILLINGER: I really liked
the line when you said,
"Food is a weapon."
MAN: Mmm.
- What did that mean to you?
CARVAJAL: Yeah,
like all the intersections
of my identity are, like,
food is a weapon.
As a Filipino and
somebody from the East Bay
who doesn't have the access,
that's, like, a direct threat,
but it's hard to grasp, like,
"What does that violence
look like?"
And it's, like, it looks like
my whole family having diabetes
and my mom having glaucoma
because of her high blood sugar.
And, like, it looks like this
and this and this, you know?
But it's, like, for people
who don't go through that
and don't have... it's, like,
"It's not even that bad.
All you have to do is, like,
do those minuscule choices,"
when it's, like, you literally
don't have those choices
sometimes.
MAN: Mm-hmm.
- Yeah.
♪ ♪
CARVAJAL:
I moved to America in 2001.
This is, like, peak early 2000s,
second grade, Halloween.
Trick-or-treating was, like,
a brand-new experience for me,
which was, like, "Oh, yeah,
you're going to go around
and people are going
to give you free candy."
And I was, like, "What the...?"
As a seven-year-old coming
from a Third World country
and getting free candy,
I was, like, "Yo,
"I'm so down for America
right now.
Like, this is tight."
Diabetes runs in my family
through my mother's side.
Her mother had it,
her sister had it, as well,
and then my mother has it, too.
And now my older sister
has it, as well.
Filipino food is, like, so good,
but it's also, like, yeah,
just a mix of a lot
of different struggles
that we've been through.
CABALLERO: Diabetes is
definitely a family affair.
Food is at the center
of our social gatherings,
of our celebrations.
I think it would be, honestly,
not only impossible
but irresponsible
to ask someone to totally forget
about their traditions
and their foods.
Imagine telling someone
not to eat rice at all.
In many cultures,
that would be impossible.
But how about saying,
"Well, there's better ways
"to prepare the rice.
"There's the correct
amounts of rice
"that you can have
in your meals.
"There's different options
in terms of the type of rice
that you can bring
to your table."
That may be doable.
♪ ♪
CARVAJAL: I think my family
avoids talking about diabetes
because they know it's a problem
that they have to address.
A cycle of not being concerned
about your health,
like, I think that's
a big cycle in my family.
These things
could be inevitable,
but there are other things
that are also preventable.
When I think about, like,
ending the cycle of diabetes,
it's always going
to be my family.
♪ ♪
SCHILLINGER: Monteil, hi, this
is Dean, Dr. Schillinger.
There's been some confusion
around your, your insulin.
They keep changing the brand
name of which insulin
your Healthy San Francisco
health plan will cover.
But I want to make sure
that you did get it
and that you did pick it up
and that you are
using the insulin
the way we discussed
in the last visit.
So, frankly, I'm kind of
worried about Monteil.
Um, you know, we, we've set
things up for him to, you know,
in the hopes of him succeeding
and avoiding an amputation.
I think he's done a great job
of basically trying to avoid
sugar-sweetened beverages,
which is the big thing
that got him in this problem
to begin with.
To a large extent, you know,
the health system hasn't
made it easy for him.
First of all, he's been having
problems getting Medicaid.
The forms are very hard
for him to complete.
Then, it's quite challenging to
take the kind of insulin regimen
that he takes now, which
requires four injections a day.
To the best that I can tell,
he's been doing that.
And so he's trying to tackle
both his personal choices
and, simultaneously,
improve the environment
in which he has found himself in
since childhood.
TV ANNOUNCER: Tonight, on NBC...
NARRATOR: Many people
with diabetes struggle
with the same complex problems
as Monteil.
But they can also manage blood
sugar with remarkable new tools
that no one even imagined
a few years ago.
Technology is getting us
where biology hasn't gone yet.
Be prepared.
HURLEY: When I developed
type 1 diabetes in 1975,
there was no such thing
as doing a finger-prick test
to find out
what your blood sugar was.
It was a big deal
when, in the early '80s,
this became available.
People could get a little drop
of blood,
put it on a little strip,
and voilà, there is
your sugar level.
This was a huge breakthrough.
Then the insulin pumps,
soon after.
People say, "Well, why
do you need an insulin pump?
Can't you just take injections?"
Yes, but the pump
allows you to release,
like your body does,
a little bit every few minutes.
And it gives you just
what you need as you need it.
NICOLE:
So, I have the pod,
and then it also comes
with a needle.
NICOLE: I've been on an insulin
pump for 16 years.
You turn it around,
and I am going to fill it
with insulin.
So this is what
the insulin comes out of.
A needle does go into my skin,
but then it retracts,
and all that's left
is this little tube.
(device clicks)
And that's it.
NARRATOR: The next big step
in technology
was the continuous
glucose monitor,
which measures blood sugar
every five minutes
and transmits the information.
As it was on my body,
flush with my body,
I would press this button,
and it would go, "Bink."
And then I would go like that,
and then it would be on me.
And I can take my phone
and check
what my blood sugar level is.
Let's see.
Let's take a look.
Ah, it's 101.
It's perfect.
But this would have been
a crazy fantasy
even ten years ago.
There was no such thing.
My continuous glucose monitor
is by far my favorite way
to manage my diabetes,
and it's what makes me
feel the safest.
And then my mom is also on
what they call the share app,
and so she is able
to get my blood sugars, too.
So, if I went dangerously...
dangerously low,
and I passed out in the kitchen,
and she got an alert,
she could send paramedics.
These things keep me alive.
The next step for diabetes
is, is connecting this monitor
with my pump,
so that the two talk
to each other,
and it controls my pump and
decides how much insulin I need
without me having to think
about it all day.
And that would be, essentially,
an artificial pancreas.
NARRATOR: It's what Ed Damiano
and other scientists
have been working towards
for decades.
♪ ♪
ED: The bionic pancreas
really builds on the shoulders
of, really, decades
of technology development
in medical devices.
It comes from the synthesis
of continuous glucose monitors,
from insulin pumps,
from smartphones,
and it's the integration
of those three technologies
that makes a system
which is really better
than the sum of its parts.
It's basically got automated
decision-making software
that determines how much drug
to deliver
to the person with type 1
diabetes every five minutes.
It makes 288 decisions every day
that you no longer have to make.
(applause)
So, David is a teenage boy.
Now, I was a teenage boy,
so I, you know,
I know whereof I speak.
And teenage boys are not human.
(laughter)
Teenage boys are highly complex
multicellular organisms at best.
They're a disconnected mass
of excitable cells,
but they're a danger
to themselves,
as I was many times over, again.
David once nearly stabbed
himself with a toothbrush.
Imagine that for just a moment.
All of the worries and the fear
of type 1 diabetes,
and we almost lost him
to stabbing, self-stabbing,
by a toothbrush.
I feel like as long as he's
with us, he'll be safe,
but the worry is,
when he leaves home,
when he's on his own,
when he's in college,
and he's got to,
he's got to check
those blood sugars at night.
Will he wake up at night?
Will he wake up
to see another day?
I... we, we cannot, we must not
get that phone call.
The bionic pancreas is
a sturdy bridge to a cure.
It is...
HURLEY: I'm glad to see Ed
with other people
all in a race
to bring the artificial pancreas
to the market,
because the more players,
the better the odds
that someone will come up
with the right system.
"The race for the best
closed-loop system"--
are you kidding, the best?
I mean, the best is
going to depend on,
what do you need,
or what do you need,
or what do I need, right?
It's not the right question
to ask at all,
because it's not going
to be just one system.
We want many, many closed-loop
systems to do well,
and they're going to do well.
♪ ♪
(car alarm beeps)
ED: So where we are with the
bionic pancreas right now is,
we're in the midst of doing
outpatient feasibility studies.
You do those studies where you
can start to learn
what works and what doesn't,
and then revise it,
and you try again.
Alex, how are you?
ALEX: Good.
ED: So, what are you studying?
- Computer science.
- Very good, excellent.
How long have you had type 1?
- About a year.
- A year?
Oh, my goodness.
- Yeah.
ED: We have a handful
of subjects that are,
you know, young adults,
18 to 22 years of age.
Some of them are in college.
I'm hopeful, if everything
works as we expect,
the bionic pancreas
will allow them to think
about their diabetes much less
and get nevertheless
much better control.
ALEX: My whole life
before diabetes,
I didn't really have to think
about my body that much.
ED: You got diagnosed
at one of the hardest times,
I got to tell you.
- Yeah.
So, this is the device
right now.
This is not the commercial unit.
It's what we call the clinical
unit or the Gen Three iLet.
We have several generations
of this technology
I could show you.
But this is the one
that is our really first
fully integrated one
that we've ever brought
to an outpatients,
outpatient experiment.
So, this is,
it's a glass cartridge.
- Mm-hmm.
- And we have
a fillable cartridge,
where you can put insulin
into the cartridge,
just type in your body weight,
and the device adapts
to your basically ever-changing
insulin needs every day.
MOTHER: That's so cool.
- And there's no other device
that works that way.
- (laughs): I know.
- Now, you know,
I do want to emphasize,
this is not a cure
by any means, right?
This is far from a cure,
but it is so far
beyond what anything, you know,
anything that we've had
for type 1 diabetes.
I do believe there will be
a cure in your lifetime,
but it's not around the corner.
ALEX: Oh, yeah.
- And this device is
around the corner,
and that's really what we're
trying to do,
is get much better therapy
to people
that requires much less
of their participation
and provides much better care.
Okay, and thank you
for participating, guys.
ED: The FDA requires
a clinical trial
to show that it's safe
and effective.
That's how we get these
medical devices approved.
(knocking)
MAN: And if you're high
for an hour...
♪ ♪
ED: So, this just shows you
what my glucose level...
I don't have diabetes, but I
wear all the stuff all the time.
Like, I've got
a Senseonic sensor here.
So, this is streaming data
from me every five minutes,
the Senseonic has me at 95.
You can see my glucose varying
and the dosing going on here.
It doesn't know
I don't have diabetes,
so it's just dosing
a little bit.
You know, my pancreas
is doing all the work.
But it's streaming the data in,
and it's then pumping insulin
out of this chamber here.
So, this is what
the cartridge looks like.
This is the insulin cartridge
that you'll be using.
♪ ♪
ED: Whenever you automate
something like this,
where really, literally,
lives are at stake,
how do you reassure people
and ourselves
that we really are doing better?
It comes from clinical trials.
And, and that's really
how we know, ultimately,
if this is going to work.
MAN: Okay, so you're rolling
now.
(all laughing)
KAYLA CROOMS:
When I go to severe lows,
I'm too scared that,
what if I don't wake up?
And I don't hear my, you know,
my Dexcom beeping at me?
Or if I'm too high,
what if I don't hear
and I just sleep through it?
I hear stories about people
going into comas,
and that's, like,
the scariest part.
YASMIN KAFI: My first semester,
I wanted to make new friends.
I wanted to have fun all
the time, I wanted to go out.
And then sometimes,
I would forget,
I need to be careful
about my blood sugar.
And I wouldn't check for days.
And then I would check,
and it'd be, like, 400, 300.
And it was, I was not
taking care of myself.
And I had to realize, like,
"Wait a minute."
Like, "I'm a diabetic,
I need to be more cautious."
ALEX: Coming to terms
with the fact
that I had to deal with needles
every day more than once,
at least twice a day
for the rest of my life,
pretty much,
was not a fun fact
to come to terms with.
ED: All right, so I'm
going to cock it again.
I'm going to put this
in the notch, all right?
And I'm going to make it
go down like this.
So, now I just put
this, the dome here--
okay, you can hold it
over here--
and then just hit the
pinch points, and it'll deploy.
(device clicks)
- (grimaces)
- And then I just pull it
straight out.
Now the needle's gone.
ALEX: When a needle is there,
I just sort of freak out
and shut down, I guess.
I don't really know
how to describe it,
but it's not a fun experience,
because I just hate needles
in general.
And when they have
to go in me-- no.
WOMAN: Pull back till it clicks.
(device clicks)
Great.
Okay?
ALEX'S MOTHER: You want to try
this to do it yourself?
- No.
- Okay.
It's not nearly as bad
as you make it in your head.
ALEX: Oh, yeah, yeah.
I know that so well.
- Every single person
that I have--
so I've started a lot of people
on insulin pumps,
and then as soon as I put it in,
they're, like,
"Oh, I can't believe
I was worried about it."
Every single person--
there was no exception.
- I can be the exception.
(Alex shudders)
(breathing deeply)
Oh.
Oh, I don't like this.
I really don't like this.
MOTHER: So noted.
♪ ♪
Can we just get this done?
- I'm trying.
(device clicks)
WOMAN: Okay.
ALEX: Was that it, really?
WOMAN: Push slightly just
to get the tape on.
Pull down on the tubing.
ALEX: That is so much less worse
than the Dexcom.
♪ ♪
WOMAN: Ta-da.
MOTHER: Done.
ALEX: Yeah.
Yay.
Yay!
(laughing)
- See? You were not
the exception.
(laughing)
♪ ♪
ED: All right.
Way to go.
(Alex laughs)
(man talking softly)
WOMAN: How'd it feel? Fine?
CROOMS: Yeah.
- I know.
- At first, I thought
it was going to hurt,
like, so much worse, and
I was, like, "Oh, that was it?"
- Yep.
(Ed chuckles)
CROOMS:
The system itself, like,
one day, it's going to be
on market, hopefully.
I really hope so,
but I would want to know
more about it,
and then, I think,
just participating in it
helps other people,
and, you know,
it helps them make corrections
so that it can be on the market.
One, two, three.
ED: All right.
WOMAN: Whoo!
CROOMS: Yeah.
ED: There, you get
your first dose, yep.
CROOMS: Okay.
ED: So this study that we're
doing now really is
one of many stepping stones
toward final
U.S.F.D.A. approval,
at which point we can then begin
selling the device commercially
throughout the U.S.
CABALLERO:
We've come a long way
with technology
for diabetes management.
Hopefully, at some point,
we will have a cure
for the disease.
But in addition,
there's the possibility
of giving some organs,
a kidney
and a pancreas transplant,
to a patient that requires that.
NICOLE: So I had just gotten
back from, from Las Vegas.
I go to dialysis, and
I have a 310 number calling me.
So, I answered it,
and it was a nurse,
and she proceeded to tell me
that...
that they had found
a match for me,
and it was between me
and two other people
in my blood group.
At 5:00, she called and said,
"Don't eat and drink anything,
the organs are for you.
"The other two people that, that
were supposed to get them,
or that were in the running
for them, can't."
I am happy and positive.
(voice breaking):
I'm just nervous.
That's like mostly
what I am feeling, and...
Just to think that I'm not going
to be a diabetic anymore
is crazy.
My dad and my mom
and I all went.
We got there, and everything
started going really fast.
It was scheduled for 3:00 a.m.,
that I was going to be
getting the organs,
and then they said,
"Well, we are going to push it
to 4:00 a.m."
So I was, like, "Okay."
People are calling me,
people are texting.
Like, this was happening.
My donor, who was
an 18-year-old male,
when they opened him up,
the pancreas was scarred.
So they wouldn't be able
to give me those organs.
So I was just, like,
quiet for a minute.
I just, like, burst into tears.
My parents were, like, quiet,
'cause, like,
what can you really say?
♪ ♪
I feel stagnant.
Like, I am just kind of
waiting for a transplant.
And everybody else around me
is getting married,
they are having families,
they're buying houses.
So now I'm waiting again,
and you just wait.
NARRATOR: For Monteil,
the wait is over.
With all the help and support,
he was unable to keep
his blood sugars in range.
His toe re-infected,
and now there's only one way
to save his whole foot
or even his leg.
♪ ♪
SCHILLINGER:
Why the initial improvements
we saw didn't sustain
is never entirely clear.
It was tough to get his blood
sugar in optimal control,
and it's really hard
to heal wounds
when the blood is full of sugar.
The bacteria love that,
and the white blood cells
that normally fight infection
can't function that well.
I think the other problem
is just,
the diabetes is so far advanced,
so the, getting the healing
cells to, to do their job
is probably quite limited
in him, to begin with.
♪ ♪
My name's Marco,
I'm one of the nurses here.
I'm going to help get you ready
for your procedure, okay?
- Okay.
- All right.
And can you tell me,
in your words,
what procedure
you're having done today?
- They're about to cut my toe
off.
SCHILLINGER:
He did pretty well
in terms of not bearing weight
on that foot,
but I don't think
he was 100% adherent.
That's hard to do
for three months, four months.
MARCO:
Any questions yet?
No?
Again...
- I just really want it
to be over with.
MARCO: Yeah, yeah.
NEELESH ANAND:
Remember me? I'm Dr. Anand.
I'm going to be
your anesthesiologist today.
- Okay.
- So, we're going to take good
care of you today, all right?
Let me review a few things
with you.
Your blood sugar was
pretty high this morning.
So, we're going to treat you
with a little insulin,
all right, to get that
a little more normal.
When was the last time you took
any of your insulin?
(device beeping slowly)
- Sometime yesterday.
- Sometimes yesterday, okay.
And when was last time you had
anything to eat or drink.
- I would say, like,
in the morning yesterday.
- Okay.
- Last night, at 8:30.
- So, I know you've had multiple
of these operations
for that foot, all right?
Hopefully, this is one
of the last ones, all right?
- It better be the last one.
♪ ♪
SCHILLINGER: So, we need to be
fighting a war against diabetes
sort of as a, as a nation,
just like we're in conflict now
in Iraq and Afghanistan.
We're fighting a war
as a nation there.
♪ ♪
When you think
about the soldiers fighting
for the last decade,
there have been
about 2,000 soldiers
who've lost a limb in combat.
And in that same period of time
in the United States,
about a million U.S. civilians
have lost a limb to diabetes.
The only way
we can turn it around
is if the public sees this as
a very important social problem
that we need to address.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: People hadn't
really been talking about it,
type 1 diabetics not being able
to afford their insulin.
They've been keeping it
kind of private.
And I know before
I shared them my story,
I felt as if Alec was probably
the only person
that had ever died
from diabetic ketoacidosis
because he couldn't
afford his insulin.
WOMAN: Yeah.
(girl talking softly)
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: I was shocked
to hear all the people
that had reached out to me
through social media,
saying, "Hey, my brother
died the same way,"
or, "My son died the same way."
"My friend died the same way."
And I knew that it was an issue
that needed to be addressed.
Alec's story has been shared...
all over the world.
ANCHOR: This story is generating
quite a conversation
on the 11Alive Facebook page
right now.
Alec's story has been reaching
more than 200,000 people
on Facebook,
with hundreds of comments.
And the common themes
we're seeing:
outrage and people wanting
something done about this.
♪ ♪
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: Advocates are
putting little messages
in those bottles of things
that they have forgone
or have lost or have given up
so that they can afford
their insulin.
And those vials will be
delivered to Eli Lilly today.
♪ ♪
JAMES:
One special vial of insulin
is going to have some
of my son's ashes in,
that we're gonna present
to Eli Lilly this afternoon.
(people talking in background)
JAMES: This is something
that she'll do
until the day she dies,
because this cost her
her son's life.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
Will you grab my water?
JAMES:
Honk for affordable health care!
(car honking)
WOMAN (on megaphone):
I've had type 1 diabetes
since I was four years old.
In those 20 years,
this company right behind me
has raised the price of
their insulin over 1,000%.
(crowd booing)
WOMAN 2 (on megaphone):
I don't want
what happened to Alec Smith
to happen to my son.
He's 14,
I feel like I have 12 years
to make a difference
before he turns 26
and gets off my insurance.
WOMAN 3 (on megaphone):
My mom has actually reached
retirement age,
but she can't retire
because of the prices
of insulin.
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT:
My son Alec Smith
was one of those diabetics
who died
because he did not have
enough insulin.
He died because
he could not afford to live.
His insulin was too expensive.
Alec's body was found
three days prior to payday.
Rationing is not uncommon
among the diabetic community.
And their company is projected
to have a revenue in 2018
of over $23 billion.
(crowd booing)
All of this while diabetics are
starving themselves,
working two and three jobs,
cashing in on their retirements,
dropping out of college,
filing bankruptcy,
maxing out credit cards,
buying expired insulin
from the black market.
We will not go away.
We will not stop
sharing our stories.
We will not stop.
(crowd cheering)
JAMES (chanting):
Hey, hey, ho, ho!
Price gouging has got to go!
(others join in):
Hey, hey, ho, ho!
Price gouging has got to go!
Not for profit!
MAN (chanting): Tell me
what democracy looks like!
WOMAN: We've also got
Eli Lilly's insulin vials.
- Okay.
- And all the things
that people are sacrificing
for the cost of insulin.
We want them to have this.
GUARD: I'll get this turned in
to them, thank you.
ALL (chanting): This is what
democracy looks like!
♪ ♪
NICOLE SMITH-HOLT: Part of Alec
is now in that building.
I hope that they realize
that the advocates
are not going away.
I hope it hits their heart.
♪ ♪
Medications that keep
somebody alive, especially,
should be made readily available
and at a very, very low cost.
We shouldn't be fighting
for our lives.
ED: Our goal, initially,
was to try and get
this technology on David
before he went to college,
and David is now
a rising junior.
So, it was a much,
much bigger task
than I ever envisioned
taking on myself.
♪ ♪
I think what we have to look
forward to is that our device
will play a meaningful role
in keeping all those people
with type 1 diabetes who use it
safe and healthy
until there's a biological cure.
♪ ♪
NICOLE:
Hi, everybody!
Hey, I'm alive.
(chuckles)
Some of you don't know that I
had a kidney-pancreas transplant
about 11 days ago.
I'm doing really great.
The kidney is functioning
at almost 100%,
and the pancreas is
working great.
So, everyone has two kidneys
and one pancreas.
So now that I've had
my dual transplant,
I have three kidneys.
So, my two, the two
that I had that failed
plus the new one.
The donor organs are right here,
so, the kidney and the pancreas.
So, you have a bunch in there.
(laughs)
They're hanging out.
And then the pancreas is just...
doing its thing.
And I can eat whatever I want.
I haven't had a banana
in a year.
So, my mom's, like,
"I got you a surprise,
I got you this banana,"
and she was, like, so excited.
And then I ended up
with another one this morning.
So, I'm excited to eat it.
They said I could eat
the whole thing, too.
But I did have cereal
this morning,
and I would, before
I would never have cereal.
I would, I just...
I would look at cereal,
and my blood sugar would be,
like, 350.
BRENNAN: All right, you guys
probably should take this off.
- I'm going to check
your blood pressure.
- Okay, very good.
So, thought about what you're
going to do
with all your spare time now?
- I don't know.
- Now that you don't have
to be on dialysis?
- I, I don't know.
I, I mean I feel like I think
I'm in shock a little bit.
BRENNAN:
Yeah, it's pretty exciting.
This is basically at this point
the only cure
for type 1 diabetes.
The cure is
a pancreas transplant.
So you no longer are diabetic.
NURSE:
Congratulations.
- (chuckles):
Thanks, yeah.
NURSE: That's a big point...
- So, so, in the
medical industry,
they do consider it,
like, a cure.
They use that word "cure,"
they don't just say "treatment"?
- You make your own insulin.
You regulate your own sugars.
- Yeah.
- And so that is the definition
of not being diabetic.
♪ ♪
NICOLE: Today,
I'm not a diabetic anymore.
Next month, ten years from now,
like, who knows what
it'll look like?
I mean, I hope that
this transplant will last
a very, very, very long time.
My surgeon said,
on paper, it looked great.
NICOLE:
Hi, everybody!
(sniffling)
Hey, girl!
No more dialysis!
Uh, my blood sugar is
between 100 and 115,
and it doesn't really move
from there.
Yeah, it does feel very weird.
NICOLE: I'm still, like,
checking my blood sugar,
'cause, I don't know why.
I'm just, like,
so used to doing it.
It doesn't really seem
real to me.
And just so you guys know,
I'm not going anywhere.
I'm still going
to be very connected
to the diabetes community.
Love you, Kayla.
Bye, you guys.
NICOLE:
I don't have to count carbs.
I don't have to get up, like,
in the night and drink juice.
I don't have to count ten chips.
You know, like, I could...
It's like you're free.
♪ ♪
SARAH:
Thank you so much, y'all.
I'm here with the
Bigger Picture project.
And we're here today
to be talking a little bit
about health and what health
looks like in our community.
So, thank you.
"My mother's strict hand kept
soda cans out of our fridge,
"knowing what a fountain
of sugar can do to our insides.
"Thank God for her intuition
and deep distrust
for what this nation
paints pretty."
WALLS: "But there always
has been,
"and forever will be,
a family cookout
"on the first Saturday in August
every year.
"As for the menu--
"fish filets and chicken parts
battered just bright enough
"to reflect the sun's
gracious glow,
"the plumpest pecan pork chops
"smothered in gravy more tender
than a grateful patch
of farmland
swallowed by rainfall..."
HURLEY:
We're living in a world
that is perfect
for making diabetes flourish.
WALLS:
"Corn bread,
"soft like a crumbly pastry,
like, too good
not to be dessert."
To really change things,
we need to start remaking
the environment
in which we live.
CARVAJAL: Hi, my name is
Gretchen Carvajal.
I'm a Youth Speaks alum.
I'm now poet mentor
for the organization.
And so, just, yeah,
I just feel real blessed
to be in the building.
"I want to be able to eat
without second-guessing,
"without thinking about
a smaller version of myself,
without thinking about food
as a weapon or a setback."
♪ ♪
LEE: As of now, the way I feel,
I feel great.
I got my shoes on,
I got the inserts in there,
and you'll see me,
I'm in the gym
trying to run around
a little bit,
and I'm just, I'm just thankful
that I was able to have
a successful surgery
and be able to move forward
afterwards.
SCHILLINGER: I think we learned
with Monteil
that social factors
are the main driver
of who gets diabetes,
who suffers the complications
from them,
and why so many people
are disabled from it,
particularly in
vulnerable communities.
And that needs to change.
CARVAJAL:
"My mother's side has diabetes.
"Diabetes is more and more
a curse
"that we thought
we brought to ourselves.
"We try to break it with a
spell, a potion, and a ritual.
"What is insulin, but a potion?
"What is a spell,
but a diagnosis?
"We take a tiny needle
and prick our finger.
What is a blood sacrifice
to a blood test?"
CLOSE: Maybe the next step
is a movement,
a shared war on diabetes fought
by type 1s, type 2s,
families, communities,
everyone, everywhere.
In order to win the war
on diabetes,
everyone has to be in.
♪ ♪
WASHINGTON:
You got one life to live.
Make it your best.
Eat healthy.
In the end, diabetes can be
a thing of the past.
CARVAJAL: "Give a droplet of
yourself every night and see.
"One day,
the sugar won't be as sweet.
"But the food isn't
what cursed us, I promise.
"It's what nourished.
It's what kept
our stories true."
Thank you all so much.
(cheers and applause)
♪ ♪
To order "Blood Sugar Rising"
on DVD,
visit ShopPBS.org
or call 1-800-PLAY-PBS.
This program is also available
on Amazon Prime Video.
To learn more about the people
featured in this program
and go deeper into America's
diabetes epidemic,
go to pbs.org/bloodsugar.
Join the conversation
at #BloodSugarPBS.
♪ ♪